Vast Terminology Overhaul (#16)
ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture: draft-ietf-scitt-architecture.md

1. statements made by issuers about supply chain artifacts must be identifiable, authentic, and non-repudiable;
2. such statements must be registered on a secure append-only Registry so that their provenance and history can be independently and consistently audited;

> 3. Issuers can efficiently prove to any other party the registration of their Signed Statements; verifying this proof ensures that the issuer is consistent and non-equivocal when producing Signed Statements.

Reviewer: nit: case consistency on each bullet:

r/I w/i

A Transparency Services provides visibility into Signed Statements originally created as Statements and issued as Signed Statements by supply chain entities and their sub-systems. These Signed Statements (and corresponding Statement payload) are about the objects produced by supply chain objects: Artifacts.

> A Transparency Service vouches for specific and well-defined metadata about these Artifacts that is captured in Statements. Some metadata is selected (and signed) by the Issuer, indicating, e.g., "who issued the Statement" or "what type of Artifact is described" or "what is the Artifact's version"; whereas additional metadata is selected (and countersigned) by the Transparency Services, indicating, e.g., "when was the Signed Statement about the Artifact registered in the Registry". A Statements payload content typically is opaque to the Transparency Services, if so desired: it is the metadata that must always be transparent in order to warrant trust for later processing.

Reviewer: +1 to the more expressive, expanded acronyms.

>"when was the Signed Statement about the Artifact registered in the Registry" 

Which term do we wish to settle on, and under what context? This is the question under #7 
Personally, I struggle with Registry as a generic term and Transparency Service, which I think confuses transparent with public. 
Either way, the use of registry and transparency service seem interchangeable here. Or, are we talking about different sub-components?

Author: This PR intends to do three things (and is not complete in doing it yet):

1. using Statement, Signed Statement & Transparent Statement
2. expanding TS to Transparency Services
3. updating Figure 1, aligning with 1. and 2.

The issues you raise are all valid, but I would like to get 1-3 done in this PR and get another one going for others (if possible).

> Transparent Statements provide a common basis for holding Issuers accountable for the Statement payload about Artifacts they release and (more generally) principals accountable for auxiliary Signed Statements from other Issuers about the original Signed Statement about an Artifact. Hence, Issuers may register new Signed Statements about their Artifacts, but they cannot delete or alter earlier Signed Statements about certain Artifacts, or hide their Signed Statements from third parties such as auditors.

Reviewer 2: > cannot delete or alter earlier Signed Statements about certain Artifacts
drop "about certain Artifacts". It makes it seem like they could delete or alter Signed Statements about certain *other* Artifacts. But they can't delete or alter any earlier Signed Statements about anything.

Reviewer: Captured in #27

> Trust in the Transparency Service itself is supported both by protecting their implementation (using, for instance, replication, trusted hardware, and remote attestation of systems) and by enabling independent audits of the correctness and consistency of its Registry, thereby holding the organization accountable that operates it. Unlike CT, where independent auditors are responsible for enforcing the consistency of multiple independent instances of the same global Registry, each Transparency Service is required to guarantee the consistency of its own Registry (for instance, through the use of a consensus algorithm between replicas of the Registry), but assume no consistency between different Transparency Services.

Reviewer 2: The sentence *Unlike CT,...* takes away an important aspect of any transparency service, and negates the overall notion that we are trying to generalize CT.

Instead, we should note that any given TS will be well served by having replicas and auditors which confirm that relying parties can choose any replica they want.

Author: @nealmcb, could you create a proposal (maybe in separate PR) after we merged this PR in?

Reviewer: Captured in #28

> The Transparency Services specified in this architecture cater to two types of audiences:

Reviewer: cater--> caters

> The Transparency Services specified in this architecture cater to two types of audiences:

Author: ```suggestion
The Transparency Services specified in this architecture caters to two types of audiences:
```

1. Signed Statement Issuers: entities, stakeholders, and users involved in supply chain interactions that need to release authentic Statements to a definable set of peers; and

> 2. Transparent Statement Consumers: entities, stakeholders, and users involved in supply chain interactions that need to access, validate, and trust authentic Statements.

Reviewer 2: I'd take out "need to" in both definitions.

For the end of the second one I'd get rid of the tricky and unnecessary word *trust* by substituting this:
=> that access, validate, and evaluate the reliability of authentic Statements

Signed Statement Issuers rely on being discoverable and represented as the responsible parties for their registered Signed Statements via Transparency Services in a believable manner.
Analogously, Transparent Statement Consumers rely on verifiable trustworthiness assertions associated with Transparent Statements and their processing provenance in a believable manner.

> If trust can be put into the operations that record Signed Statements (i.e., a believable notarization function) in a secure, append-only Registry via online operations, the same trust can be put into a corresponding Receipt that is the resulting documentation of these online operations issued by the Transparency Services and that can be validated in offline operations.

Reviewer 3: I don't love this language.

I think notarizing applies to making a "Signed Statement" a "Transparent Statement"... but this sentence seems to imply notarization is part of the process of creating a "Signed Statement", which seems wrong.

Reviewer: Tracked at #23

The Transparency Services specified in this architecture can be implemented by various different types of services in various types of languages provided via various variants of API layouts.

> The global interoperability enabled and guaranteed by the Transparency Services is enabled via core components (architectural constituents) that come with prescriptive requirements (that are typically hidden away from the user audience via APIs). The core components are based on the Concise Signing and Encryption standard specified in {{-COSE}}, which is used to sign released Statements about Artifacts and to build and maintain a Merkle tree that functions as an append-only Registry for correspsonding Signed Statements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The global interoperability enabled and guaranteed by the Transparency Services is enabled via core components (architectural constituents) that come with prescriptive requirements (that are typically hidden away from the user audience via APIs). The core components are based on the Concise Signing and Encryption standard specified in {{-COSE}}, which is used to sign released Statements about Artifacts and to build and maintain a Merkle tree that functions as an append-only Registry for corresponding Signed Statements.
```

: any serializable information about an Artifact. To help interpretation of Statements, they must be tagged with a media type (as specified in {{RFC6838}}).
For example, a statement may represent a Software Bill Of Materials (SBOM) that lists the ingredients of a software Artifact, or some endorsement or attestation about an Artifact.

Signed Statement:

: an identifiable and non-repudiable Statement about an Artifact made by an Issuer. In SCITT, Signed Statements are encoded as COSE signed objects; the payload of the COSE structure contains the issued Statement.

Issuer:

> : an entity that creates Signed Statements about software Artifacts in the supply chain. An Issuer may be the owner or author of software Artifacts, or an independent third party such as a reviewer or an endorser.

Reviewer: > ...independent third party such as a reviewer or an endorser.

I can see statements being made that are "negative", meaning a security company makes a statement the artifact has many critical vulnerabilities and should be replaced with version:foo.
Do we want to elaborate endorser to include opposed, or another term that reflects a negative statement? 
Or, do we want to generalize all statements, and leave it to the consumer and artifactType to define the schema of positive/negative?

Envelope:

> : metadata and an Issuer's signature is added to a Statement via COSE envelope by the Issuer to produce a Signed Statement.

Reviewer: > metadata and an Issuer's signature is added to a Statement via COSE envelope 

metadata and an Issuer's signature is added to a Statement via _**a**_ COSE envelope

> : metadata and an Issuer's signature is added to a Statement via COSE envelope by the Issuer to produce a Signed Statement.

Author: ```suggestion
: metadata and an Issuer's signature is added to a Statement via a COSE envelope by the Issuer to produce a Signed Statement.
```

Feed:

: an identifier chosen by the Issuer for the Artifact. For every Issuer and Feed, the Registry on a Transparency Service contains a sequence of Signed Statements about the same Artifact.
In COSE, Feed is a dedicated header attribute in the protected header of the Envelope.

Registry:

: the verifiable append-only data structure that stores Signed Statements in a Transparency Service often referred to by the synonym log or ledger. SCITT supports multiple Registry and Receipt formats to accommodate different Transparency Service implementations, such as historical Merkle Trees and sparse Merkle Trees.

Transparency Service:

: an entity that maintains and extends the Registry, and endorses its state. A Transparency Service is often referred to by its synonym Notary. A Transparency Service can be a complex distributed system, and SCITT requires the Transparency Service to provide many security guarantees about its Registry. The identity of a Transparency Service is captured by a public key that must be known by Verifiers in order to validate Receipts.

Receipt:

> : a Receipt is a special form of COSE countersignature for Signed Statments that embeds cryptographic evidence that the Signed Statement is recorded in the Registry. A Receipt consists of a Registry-specific inclusion proof, a signature by the Transparency Service of the state of the Registry, and additional metadata (contained in the countersignature's protected headers) to assist in auditing.

Reviewer: @henkbirkholz to update before merge

> : a Receipt is a special form of COSE countersignature for Signed Statments that embeds cryptographic evidence that the Signed Statement is recorded in the Registry. A Receipt consists of a Registry-specific inclusion proof, a signature by the Transparency Service of the state of the Registry, and additional metadata (contained in the countersignature's protected headers) to assist in auditing.

Reviewer: Tracked at #24

Registration:

: the process of submitting a Signed Statement to a Transparency Service, applying the Transparency Service's registration policy, storing it in the Registry, producing a Receipt, and returning it to the submitting Issuer.

Registration Policy:

: the pre-condition enforced by the Transparency Service before registering a Signed Statement,
based on metadata contained in its COSE Envelope (notably the identity of its Issuer)
and on prior Signed Statements already added to a Registry.

> Transparent Claim:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Transparent Statement:
```

Author: We have to check consistent use of Signed Statement vs. Transparent Statement.

Receipt:

: a Receipt is a special form of COSE countersignature for Signed Statments that embeds cryptographic evidence that the Signed Statement is recorded in the Registry. A Receipt consists of a Registry-specific inclusion proof, a signature by the Transparency Service of the state of the Registry, and additional metadata (contained in the countersignature's protected headers) to assist in auditing.

Registration:

: the process of submitting a Signed Statement to a Transparency Service, applying the Transparency Service's registration policy, storing it in the Registry, producing a Receipt, and returning it to the submitting Issuer.

Registration Policy:

> : the pre-condition enforced by the Transparency Service before registering a Signed Claim,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
: the pre-condition enforced by the Transparency Service before registering a Signed Statement,
```

                   |  Artifact  |
                    '----+-----'
                         v

>                     .----+----.  .----------.    DID Identifier

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                    .----+----.  .----------.    Decentralized Identifier
```

> Issuer       -->   | Statement ||  Envelope  +<------------------.

Reviewer 3: love these updates!

                    '----+----'  '-----+----'                     |
                         |             |           +------------------+

>                           '----. .----'            | DID Key Manifest |

Reviewer 3: I suggest maybe not using the words "DID Key Manifest"... 

Maybe "Public Key Identifier" or "VerificationMethod".

Reviewer: Captured in #25

>                           '----. .----'            | DID Key Manifest |

Reviewer: Captured in #25

>                                 |                  | (decentralized)  |

Reviewer 3: extra "(decentralized)" seems redundant.

>                                 |                  | (decentralized)  |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                                |                  |   |
```

Since the details of how to verify a Receipt are specific to the data structure, no particular Registry format is specified in this document. Instead, two initial formats for Registry in {{-RECEIPTS}} using historical and sparse Merkle Trees are proposed. Beyond the format of Receipts, generic properties that should be satisfied by the components in the Transparency Services that have the ability to write to the Registry are required.

#### Finality

A Registry is append-only: once a Signed Statement is registered and becomes a Transparent Statement, it cannot be modified, deleted, or moved. In particular, once a Receipt is returned for a given Signed Statement, the registered Signed Statement and any preceding entry in the Registry become immutable, and the Receipt provides universally-verifiable evidence of this property.

#### Consistency

There is no fork in the Registry: everyone with access to its contents sees the same sequence of entries, and can check its consistency with any Receipts they have collected.

> Transparency Service implementations SHOULD provide a mechanism to verify that the state of the Registry encoded in an old Receipt is consistent with the current Registry state.

Reviewer: Captured in #30

#### Replayability and Auditing

Everyone with access to the Registry can check the correctness of its contents. In particular,

> - the Transparency Service defines and enforces deterministic Registration policies that can be re-evaluated based solely on the contents of the Registry at the time of registration, and must then yield the same result.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #35

> - The ordering of entries, their cryptographic contents, and the Registry governance may be non-deterministic, but they must be verifiable.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #38

> - The ordering of entries, their cryptographic contents, and the Registry governance may be non-deterministic, but they must be verifiable.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #38

> - A Transparency Services SHOULD store evidence about the resolution of distributed identifiers into manifests.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #36

- A Transparency Service MAY additionally support verifiability of client authentication and access control.

#### Governance and Bootstrapping

The Transparency Service needs to support governance, with well-defined procedures for allocating resources to operate the Registry (e.g., for provisioning trusted hardware and registering their attestation materials in the Registry) and for updating its code (e.g., relying on Transparent Statement about code updates, secured on the Registry itself, or on some auxiliary Transparency Service).

Governance procedures, their auditing, and their transparency are implementation specific. A Transparency Service SHOULD document them.

> - Governance may be based on a consortium of members that are jointly responsible for the Transparency Services, or automated based on the contents of an auxiliary governance Transparency Service.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #36. 
If you feel "auxiliary governance" should be tracked separately, please open a new issue/pr.

- Governance typically involves additional records in the Registry to enable its auditing. Hence, the Registry may contain both Transparent Statements and governance entries.

> - Issuers, Verifiers, and third-party auditors may review the Transparency Service governance before trusting the service, or on a regular basis.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #36

## Verifying Transparent Statements {#validation}

For a given Artifact, Verifiers take as trusted inputs:

1. the distributed identifier of the Issuer (or its resolved key manifest),
2. the expected name of the Artifact (i.e., the Feed),
3. the list of service identities of trusted Transparency Services.

> When presented with a Transparent Statement for an Artifact, consumers verify its Issuer identity, signature, and Receipt.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #39

- in-toto
- SLSA

Once the Statement is serialized with the correct media-type/content-format, an Issuer should fill in the attributes for the Registration policy information header. From the Issuer's perspective, using attributes from named policies ensures that the Signed Statement may only be registered on Transparency Services that implement the associated policy. For instance, if a Signed Statement is frequently updated, and it is important for Verifiers to always consider the latest version, Issuers SHOULD use the `sequence_no` or `issuer_ts` attributes.

> Once all the Envelope headers are set, an Issuer SHOULD use a standard COSE implementation to produce an appropriately serialized Signed Statement (the SCITT tag of `COSE_Sign1_Tagged` is outside the scope of COSE, and used to indicate that a signed object is a Signed Statement).

Reviewer 2: Parenthetically, it might be helpful to point to a discussion of why COSE is mandatory. Does that choice preclude interoperability with Sigstore, which uses DSSE instead, I think?

> Once all the Envelope headers are set, an Issuer SHOULD use a standard COSE implementation to produce an appropriately serialized Signed Statement (the SCITT tag of `COSE_Sign1_Tagged` is outside the scope of COSE, and used to indicate that a signed object is a Signed Statement).

Reviewer: Thanks, @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #40 
Thanks, @nealmcb. COSE is intrinsic to SCITT as an extensible means to capture headers and payload in a consistent/standards-based format. The evaluation was captured here: [Digital Artifact Signing Envelope Format Comparison](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18YVGA4mq45wfUkWrAqWkymzdHRcXxlwINKXnEp86L0w/edit#heading=h.3v6vw85pjg5e)
As a result, sigstore/rekor added support through a [draft](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor/pull/731) then [subsequent merged PR](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor/pull/867)

> We expect that once the formats and semantics of the registration policy headers are finalized, standardized policies may be moved to a separate draft.
> For now, we inline some significant policies to illustrate the most common use cases.

> Transparency Service implementations MUST indicate their support for registration policies and MUST check that all the policies indicated as defined in the `reg_info` map are supported and are satisfied before a Signed Statement can be registered. Any unsupported types of Signed Statements MUST be indicated separately and corresponding unknown policy entries in the map of a Signed Statement MUST be rejected. This is to ensure that all verifiers get the same guarantee out of the registration policies regardless of where it is registered.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, we discussed on an editors call, and agreed to simplify content feedback to use sentence-based lines. And, we'll create a document for conventions for this org.

> Transparency Service implementations MUST indicate their support for registration policies and MUST check that all the policies indicated as defined in the `reg_info` map are supported and are satisfied before a Signed Statement can be registered. Any unsupported types of Signed Statements MUST be indicated separately and corresponding unknown policy entries in the map of a Signed Statement MUST be rejected. This is to ensure that all verifiers get the same guarantee out of the registration policies regardless of where it is registered.

Reviewer: Captured in #26

3. Envelope signature verification, as described in COSE signature, using the signature algorithm and verification key of the Issuer DID document.

4. Envelope validation. The service MUST check that the Envelope includes a Statement payload and the protected headers listed above. The service MAY additionally verify the Statement payload format and content.

5. Apply Registration policy: for named policies, the Transparency Service should check that the required Registration info attributes are present in the Envelope and apply the check described in Table 1. A Transparency Service MUST reject Signed Statements that contain an attribute used for a named policy that is not enforced by the service. Custom Signed Statements are evaluated given the current Registry state and the entire Envelope, and MAY use information contained in the attributes of named policies.

6. Commit (register) the new Signed Statement to the Registry

7. Sign and return the Receipt.

The last two steps MAY be shared between a batch of Signed Statements recorded in the Registry.

> A Transparency Service MUST ensure that a Signed Statement is registered before releasing its Receipt, so that it can always back up the Receipt by releasing the corresponding entry (the now Transparent Statement) in the Registry. Conversely, the service MAY re-issue Receipts for the Registry content, for instance after a transient fault during Signed Statement Registration.

Reviewer: @nedmsmith, can you confirm #32 captures your need here? If not, can you please open a new issue/PR?

## Validation of Transparent Statements

This section provides additional implementation considerations. The high-level validation algorithm is described in {{validation}}; the Registry-specific details of checking Receipts are covered in {{-RECEIPTS}}.

> Before checking a Transparent Statement, the Verifier must be configured with one or more identities of trusted Transparency Services. If more than one service is configured, the Verifier MUST return which service the Transparent Statement is registered on.

Reviewer: Captured in #33

In some scenarios, the Verifier already expects a specific Issuer and Feed for the Transparent Statement, while in other cases they are not known in advance and can be an output of validation. Verifiers SHOULD offer a configuration to decide if the Issuer's signature should be locally verified (which may require a DID resolution, and may fail if the manifest is not available or if the key is revoked), or if it should trust the validation done by the Transparency Service during Registration.

> Some Verifiers MAY decide to locally re-apply some or all of the Registration policies, if they have limited trust in the Transparency Services. In addition, Verifiers MAY apply arbitrary validation policies after the signature and Receipt have been checked. Such policies may use as input all information in the Envelope, the Receipt, and the Statement payload, as well as any local state.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, I believe this has been captured in #34. 
If you consider an external validation (local), may wish to re-verify information the service ran through its registration policy, the term local may help.
Registration policies will change over time, which also need to be captured as statements. So, a consumer may wish to validate specific policies unique to its environment.
Please do open another issue/PR if you feel this needs further clarification.

> Verifiers SHOULD offer options to store or share Receipts in case they are needed to audit the Transparency Services in case of a dispute.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #41

# Federation[^1]

[^1]: This section needs work.
{: source="Henk"}

Editor's note: This section needs work.

> Multiple, independently-operated Transparency Services can help secure distributed supply chains, without the need for a single, centralized service trusted by all parties. For example, multiple Transparency Service instances may be governed and operated by different organizations that do not trust one another.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, @nealmcb: to make iterative progress, this has been captured in #42

> This may involve registering the same Signed Statements at different Transparency Services, each with their own purpose and registration policy.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith, there's been a few discussions around the need for multiple instances, operated by different entities for their specific purpose.  There's some more explanation here: https://scitt.io/supply-chain where a publisher and consumer will operate their own SCITT Transparency Service. Please open an issue if you feel we need further clarification on multiple instances, beyond the reliability/availability discussion.

# Privacy Considerations

Unless advertised by a Transparency Service, every Issuer should treat Signed Statements it registered (rendering them Transparent Statements) as public. In particular, Signed Statement's Envelopes and Statement payload should not carry any private information in plaintext.

# Security Considerations

> On its own, verifying a Transparent Statement does not guarantee that its Envelope or contents are trustworthy---just that they have been signed by the apparent Issuer and counter-signed by the

Reviewer 6: Use of 'trustworthy' seems overly ambiguous. Does it mean the contents of the Transparent Statement are opaque to the TS? Does that further imply the contents could be privacy protected in some way including encrypted? If the TS provides registration assurances but contents are allowed to be opaque. Then wouldn't it make more sense to call it a "Registered Statement" instead of a "Transparent Statement"?

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith 
There's a combination of goal and boundary. 
The goal of SCITT is to provide verified registration, based on the identity and a registration policy. This is why you see the authors focus on the notary concept. The notary doesn't evaluate the validatiy of the document that's being notarized. Rather the notary evaluates the trustworthiness of the identities signing. It's up to a consumer to decide if the content represents the info they can act upon. However, if you can't trust the issuer, the content is no different than a piece of info found "on the street", or "on the web".

The boundary, is related to SCITT doesn't evaluate the content. 

For the Registered vs. Transparent Statement, @kaywilliams did open #20, which was duped to #8

FWIW, I do see the concern with calling everything "transparent", when the contents may be opaque. Lets see if we can continue the conversation in #8 regarding terminology.

Transparency Service. If the Verifier trusts the Issuer, it can infer that an Issuer's Signed Statement was issued with this Envelope and contents, which may be interpreted as the Issuer saying the Artifact is fit for its intended purpose. If the Verifier trusts the Transparency Service, it can independently infer that the Signed Statement passed the Transparency Service Registration policy and that has been persisted in the Registry. Unless advertised in the Transparency Service Registration policy, the Verifier should not assume that the ordering of Transparent Statements in the Registry matches the ordering of their issuance.

> Similarly, the fact that an Issuer can be held accountable for its Transparent Statements does not on its own provide any mitigation or remediation mechanism in case one of these Transparent Statements turned out to be misleading or malicious---just that signed evidence will be available to support them.

Reviewer 6: This seems to be describing the legal liability of the TS. If so, does it really belong here? If not, what is it trying to describe?

> Issuers SHOULD ensure that the Statement payloads in their Signed Statements are correct and unambiguous, for example by avoiding ill-defined or ambiguous formats that may cause Verifiers to interpret the Signed Statement as valid for some other purpose.

Reviewer 6: The wording needs to clarify the difference between a purposefully opaque payload from a payload that is described by a well-known schema.

Issuers and Transparency Services SHOULD carefully protect their private signing keys

> and avoid these keys for any purpose not described in this architecture document. In cases where key re-use is unavoidable, keys MUST NOT sign any other message that may be verified as an Envelope as part of a Signed Statement.

Reviewer 6: What threat does this normative requirement counter? Given keys are certified (X.509) or described by DID or other certification process. Does this requirement override these other forms of qualifiers on keys or is it just giving advice?

## Threat Model

> We provide a generic threat model for SCITT, describing its residual security properties when some of its actors (identity providers, Issuers, Transparency Services, and Auditors) are corrupt or compromised.

Reviewer 6: 'malicious' and 'misbehaved' might be better words.

Reviewer: @nedmsmith, do you mind opening a PR as a suggestion?

This model may need to be refined to account for specific supply chains and use cases.

### Signed Statement Authentication and Transparency.

SCITT primarily supports checking of Signed Statement authenticity, both from the Issuer (authentication) and from the Transparency Service (transparency). These guarantees are meant to hold for the extensive periods of time, possibly decades.

> It can never be assumed that some Issuers and some Transparency Services will not be corrupt.

Reviewer 6: This contradicts statements about dissimilar TSs interoperating or working together in a trusted way. The use of trust anchors to validate key credentials implies trust. All of this can be compromised or is subject to malicious or improper behavior. It seems impossible to achieve both objectives at the same time. Some aspects of this document is overstated, but it isn't clear which part.

> SCITT entities explicitly trust one another on the basis of their long-term identity, which maps to shorter-lived cryptographic credentials. Hence, a Verifier would usually validate a Transparent Statement originating from a given Issuer, registered at a given Transparency Service (both identified in the Verifier's local authorization policy) and would not depend on any other Issuer or Transparency Services.

Reviewer 6: This seems to contradict line 651.

> Authorized supply chain actors (Issuers) cannot be stopped from producing Signed Statements including false assertions in their Statement payload (either by mistake or by corruption), but these Issuers can made accountable by ensuring their Signed Statements are systematically registered at a trustworthy Transparency Service.

Reviewer 6: Maybe 'accountable' is the wrong word. If the user contributes a purposefully opaque statement, that shouldn't be considered form of unaccountability. It appears that opaque statements are expected by the SCITT architecture. Use of the term 'false assertion' with an expectation that SCITT treats assertions as opaque doesn't make sense and seems biased or judgmental. Maybe the paragraph should focus on what properties of transparency, or trust that SCITT provides and leave other things out of scope?

> Similarly, providing strong residual guarantees against faulty/corrupt Transparency Services is a SCITT design goal. Preventing a Transparency Service from registering Signed Statements that do not meet its stated Registration Policy, or to issue Receipts that are not consistent with their append-only Registry is not possible. In contrast Transparency Services can be hold accountable and they can be called out by any Auditor that replays their Registry against any contested Receipt. Note that the SCITT Architecture does not require trust in a single centralized Transparency Service: different actors may rely on different Transparency Services, each registering a subset of Signed Statements subject to their own policy.

Reviewer 6: break this into several lines.

Reviewer: Captured in #26

> In both cases, the SCITT Architecture provides generic, universally-verifiable cryptographic proof to individually blame Issuers or the Transparency Service. On the one hand, this enables valid actors to detect and disambiguate malicious actors who issue contradictory Signed Statements to different entities (Verifiers, Auditors, Issuers). On the other hand, their liability and the resulting damage to their reputation are application specific, and out of scope of the SCITT Architecture.

Reviewer 6: please break into multiple lines.
It isn't clear who's liability is being described.

Verifiers and Auditors need not be trusted by other actors. In particular, they cannot "frame" an Issuer or a Transparency Service for Signed Statements they did not issue or register.

#### Append-only Log

> If a Transparency Service is honest, then a Transparent Statement including a correct Receipt ensures that the Transparent Statement passed its Registration Policy and was recorded appropriately.

Reviewer 6: use of 'honest' seems out of place. Is this describing TS operational integrity requirements such as ACID?

Reviewer: Thanks, @nedmsmith Please see #58 and feel free to open a PR for some discussion.

> Conversely, a corrupt Transparency Service may

Reviewer 6: Of course a compromised TS could do all sorts of malicious things. If the previous line / paragraph stated the 4 (or more?) bullet points below in terms of how a TS is supposed to behave. It might be easier to understand what requirements implementers must address in order to build a suitable TS?

1. refuse or delay the registration of Signed Statements,
2. register Signed Statements that do not pass its Registration Policy (e.g., Signed Statement with Issuer identities and signatures that do not verify),
3. issue verifiable Receipts for Signed Statements that do not match its Registry, or
4. refuse access to its Registry (e.g., to Auditors, possibly after storage loss).

> An Auditor granted (partial) access to a Registry and to a collection of disputed Receipts will be able to replay it, detect any invalid Registration (2) or incorrect Receipt in this collection (3), and blame the Transparency Service for them. This ensures any Verifier that trusts at least one such Auditor that (2,3) will be blamed to the Transparency Service.

Reviewer 6: This is confusing.

Due to the operational challenge of maintaining a globally consistent append-only Registry,
some Transparency Services may provide limited support for historical queries on the Transparent Statements they have registered,
and accept the risk of being blamed for inconsistent Registration or Issuer equivocation.

Verifier and Auditors may also witness (1,4) but may not be able to collect verifiable evidence for it.

#### Availability of Transparent Signed Statement

> Networking and Storage are trusted only for availability.

Reviewer 6: I don't think 'trust' is the right word. Availability is facilitated by networks and storage subsystems, but this paragraph doesn't explain how. If a deployment of SCITT utilizes a trusted network, the inclusion of SCITT doesn't superficially make the network untrusted.

> Auditing may involve access to data beyond what is persisted in the Transparency Services. For example, the registered Transparency Service may include only the hash of a detailed SBOM, which may limit the scope of auditing.

Reviewer 6: Auditing isn't normally regarded as a mechanism for establishing or ensuring availability. Should this be in a different section?

Resistance to denial-of-service is implementation specific.

> Actors should independently keep their own record of the Signed Statements they issue, endorse, verify, or audit.

Reviewer 6: Availability strategies generally involve replication and redundancy techniques. This seems to contradict that. This is confusing as an availability strategy.

### Confidentiality and privacy.

According to Zero Trust Principles any location in a network is never trusted. All contents exchanged between actors is protected using secure authenticated channels (e.g., TLS) but, as usual, this may not exclude network traffic analysis.

#### Signed Statements and Their Tegistration

> The Transparency Service is trusted with the confidentiality of the Signed Statements presented for registration. Some Transparency Services may publish every Transparent Statement in their logs, to facilitate their dissemination and auditing. Others may just return Receipts to clients that present Singed Statements for registration, and disclose the ledger only to auditors trusted with the confidentiality of its contents.

Reviewer 6: Maybe it would be better if the information owner is expected to apply privacy protections before contributing a Statement?

Reviewer: See #45

> A collection of Transparent Statements leaks no information about the contents of other Transparent Statements registered at the Transparency Service.

Reviewer 6: Is this describing a requirement on TSs, Issuers (users), or Verifiers? It's confusing.

Reviewer: @nedmsmith, please see #51 to see if this clarifies things. If not, please open a new issue.

Nonetheless, Issuers should carefully review the inclusion of private/confidential materials in their issued Signed Statements; they may for instance remove any PII, or include instead opaque cryptographic commitments, such as hashes.

#### Queries to the Registry

The confidentiality of queries is implementation-specific, and generally not guaranteed. For example, while offline Envelope validation of Signed Statements is private, a Transparency Services may monitor which of its Transparent Statements are being verified from lookups to ensure their freshness.

### Cryptographic Assumptions

> We rely on standard cryptographic security for signing schemes (EUF-CMA: for a given key, given the public key and any number of signed messages, an attacker cannot forge a valid signature for any other message) and for Receipts schemes (log collision-resistance: for a given commitment such as a Merkle-tree root, there is a unique log such that any valid path authenticates a Signed Statement in this log.)

Reviewer 6: It is unclear who 'we' is. - Possibly, "the SCITT architecture"?

Reviewer: @nedmsmith, thanks for identifying ambiguity. Please see #52, and open a new issue if that doesn't help.

The SCITT Architecture supports cryptographic agility: the actors depend only on the subset of signing and Receipt schemes they trust. This enables the gradual transition to stronger algorithms, including e.g. post-quantum signature algorithms.

### Transparency Service Clients

> Trust in clients that submit Signed Statements for registration is implementation-specific. Hence, an attacker may attempt to register any Signed Statement it has obtained, at any Transparency Service that accepts them, possibly multiple times and out of order. This may be mitigated by a Transparency Services that enforces restrictive access control and Registration policies.

Reviewer 6: An untrusted Client could obtain legitimate credentials and masquerade as a legitimate user only to perform a denial of service attack in the form of out of order registrations and the like. The SCITT architecture should have some mechanism for ensuring operational integrity despite having untrusted Clients or it should require Client trust and employ some form of vetting process to register, authenticate and authorize them.

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith. The registration policy provides for a SCITT Transparency Service implementation to create various policies, including which identities, and or identity types are permitted. 
Note, there is a difference between a user that has RBAC writes to a ledger (Steve), and whether the signed statement from `the-ned-smith-project`, with an Issuer of `the-ned-smith-project` is accepted. 

The first barrier is RBAC control. And implementations will have various DOS configurations. Do you think this should be captured in the SCITT architecture, or be part of an implementation?

If there's additional clarity needed, can you please open a new issue?

### Identity

The identity resolution mechanism is trusted to associate long-term identifiers with their public signature-verification keys. (Transparency Services and other parties may record identity-resolution evidence to facilitate its auditing.)

> If one of the credentials of an Issuer gets compromised, the SCITT Architecture still guarantees the authenticity of all Signed Statements signed with this credential that have been registered on a Transparency Service before the compromise. It is up to the Issuer to notify Transparency Services of credential revocation to stop Verifiers from accepting Signed Statements signed with compromised credentials.

Reviewer 6: It might scale better if the TSs request revocation status updates such as OCSP [RFC2560].

Reviewer: Thanks @nedmsmith. This is a good clarification. See #55

In both cases, the SCITT Architecture provides generic, universally-verifiable cryptographic proof to individually blame Issuers or the Transparency Service. On the one hand, this enables valid actors to detect and disambiguate malicious actors who issue contradictory Signed Statements to different entities (Verifiers, Auditors, Issuers). On the other hand, their liability and the resulting damage to their reputation are application specific, and out of scope of the SCITT Architecture.

> Verifiers and Auditors need not be trusted by other actors. In particular, they cannot "frame" an Issuer or a Transparency Service for Signed Statements they did not issue or register.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Verifiers and Auditors need not have a previously established trust relationship with other actors. In particular, they cannot "frame" an Issuer or a Transparency Service for Signed Statements they did not issue or register.
```

Reviewer: Thanks, @raylutz, in the spirit of merging this doc, and creating new issues/PRs for additional changes, I'm resolving this one. I did think we were avoiding the reference to "trust relationship", but please open an issue/PR if you feel otherwise.
